DB Secrets Rotation Blog post (#14818)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/esc-db-secrets-rotation-launch/index.md

---
title: "Introducing Automated Database Credential Rotation in Pulumi ESC"
date: 2025-04-29T10:00:00-07:00 
allow_long_title: true

> meta_desc: "Pulumi ESC now automates the rotation of database credentials for PostgreSQL, MySQL (on AWS), and Snowflake, enhancing security and reducing operational burden."

Reviewer: Linking Postgres and MySQL with an "and" makes it IMO clearer that both DBs are only supported on AWS. Currently it looks like only MySQL is only supported on AWS.
```suggestion
meta_desc: "Pulumi ESC now automates the rotation of database credentials for PostgreSQL and MySQL (on AWS), as well as Snowflake, enhancing security and reducing operational burden."
```

meta_image: meta.png
authors:
  - sean-yeh
  - arun-loganathan
tags:
  - esc
  - secrets
  - rotation
  - database
  - security

---

> Securing access to critical data stores is paramount in today's cloud-native world. Yet, managing database credentials often involves static, long-lived passwords – a significant security blind spot. These static secrets, frequently embedded in application configurations or accessible to multiple team members, represent a prime target for attackers. Manually rotating these credentials is a cumbersome, error-prone task that’s often neglected, leaving databases vulnerable for extended periods. Building on our commitment to robust secrets management, we are excited to launch **Automated Database Credential Rotation** in [Pulumi ESC!](/product/esc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Securing access to critical data stores is paramount in today's cloud-native world. Yet, managing database credentials often involves static, long-lived passwords – a significant security blind spot. These static secrets, frequently embedded in application configurations or accessible to multiple team members, represent a prime target for attackers. Manually rotating these credentials is a cumbersome, error-prone task that’s often neglected, leaving databases vulnerable for extended periods. Building on our commitment to robust secrets management, we are excited to launch **Automated Database Credential Rotation** in [Pulumi ESC](/product/esc)!
```

*   **Seamless ESC Environment Integration:** Manage rotated database credentials alongside all your other application configurations within ESC Environments, leveraging composition and environment inheritance.
*   **Two-Secret Strategy:** ESC maintains both the current and previous valid credentials simultaneously. This prevents application downtime during rotation, as instances can gracefully transition to the new credential.
*   **Auditing and Tracking:** Maintain a complete audit trail of credential rotations, including who initiated the rotation and when, simplifying compliance and governance.
*   **Admin and Creator Control:** Securely configure rotation using privileged database "managing user" credentials stored within ESC, keeping them separate from the rotated credentials consumed by applications.
*   **Configure Webhooks for Automation:** Trigger notifications, CI/CD pipelines (e.g., Pulumi Deployments to update application stacks), or custom workflows upon successful rotation, keeping dependent systems synchronized.

> ## How to set up and use PostGres and MySQL Rotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to set up and use PostgreSQL and MySQL Rotations
```

> **1. Bootstrap Rotation Infrastructure (for AWS MySQL/PostgreSQL):**

Reviewer: I know I am pedantic but you mentioned PostgreSQL always before MySQL :D
```suggestion
**1. Bootstrap Rotation Infrastructure (for AWS PostgreSQL / MySQL):**
```

> Rotating credentials for databases within AWS VPCs requires a secure mechanism. Pulumi ESC uses a dedicated AWS Lambda function deployed within your VPC for this. Use our [Pulumi New Project Wizard Template](https://app.pulumi.com/new?template=https://github.com/pulumi/esc-rotator-lambdas/blob/main/deploy/README.md#gh-dark-mode-only), or follow the steps in your terminal: 

Reviewer: Is this the final template link? I thought it will be moved to our templates repo/folder?
```suggestion
Rotating credentials for databases within AWS VPCs requires a secure mechanism. Pulumi ESC uses a dedicated AWS Lambda function deployed within your VPC for this. Use our [Pulumi New Project Wizard Template](https://app.pulumi.com/new?template=https://github.com/pulumi/esc-rotator-lambdas/blob/main/deploy/README.md), or follow the steps in your terminal: 
```

*   Run `pulumi new esc-rotator-lambda` in your terminal.
*   This command initializes a new Pulumi project designed to provision the necessary AWS resources: the Lambda function, an execution IAM Role for the Lambda, an invocation IAM Role for ESC, and the required Security Group rules to allow the Lambda to communicate with your RDS instance.
*   Follow the prompts, providing configuration values like:
    *   Your target AWS Region (`aws:region`)
    *   The RDS Database Identifier (`esc-rotator-lambda:rdsDbIdentifier`)
    *   The name for the new ESC environment that will contain your rotation configuration (e.g., (`orders/prod-db-secrets-rotation`)
    *   *(Optional)* The name for a *separate* ESC environment to hold the privileged managing database credentials (e.g., `orders/prod-db-managingUser-creds`). 
*   Run `pulumi up` to deploy the resources
  

> This template *also* creates ESC environment definition with most of the configuration population based on the resources created by the Pulumi Program. Note down the rotated secret environment Name and the managing creds Environment name. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This template *also* creates ESC environment definition with most of the configuration population based on the resources created by the Pulumi Program. Note down the rotated secret environment Name and the managing credentials Environment name. 
```

*   Create the user account(s) (e.g., `user1`, `user2`) within your database whose passwords you want ESC to rotate automatically.

**3. Configure Your ESC Environment(s):**

*   **Managing Credentials Environment:** Navigate to this environment using the Pulumi Cloud console in step 1 and update the managing user's username and password.
    ```yaml
    # orders/prod-db-managingUser-creds
    values:
      dbAdmin:
        username: db_admin_user
        password:
          fn::secret: <your-secure-admin-password>
    ```
*   **Rotation Environment:** Navigate to the rotated secret environment.
    *   If you used the Pulumi Template to create this environment, you will notice that most of the required fields are filled out including: `connector.awsLambda`, `database`, `host`, `port`, `managingUser` credentials reference
    *   Replace the the user1 and user2 placeholder with actual database usernames.
    *   *(Optional)* If migrating existing credentials, populate the `state` block with the `current` and `previous` username/password pairs. Otherwise, ESC generates the first password on the initial rotation.

>     *Example for AWS MySQL (using Lambda Connector & separate managing creds env):*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *Example for AWS MySQL (using Lambda Connector and separate managing credentils env):*
```

*   Check the Environment Revision History in the Pulumi Cloud console to track the changes to the `current` and `previous` state fields after each rotation.

**6. Schedule Automated Rotations:**

*   Once satisfied with the setup, navigate to the "Secret Rotation" tab for your environment in the Pulumi Cloud console.
*   Define your desired automated rotation schedule (e.g., every 30 days). ESC will automatically trigger rotations according to this schedule.

## What’s Next?

This launch significantly enhances database security posture through automation, but we're just getting started. We are actively working on expanding our rotated secrets capabilities:

*   **More Databases:** Support for MongoDB, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle, and others.
*   **Broader Network Scenarios:** Rotation solutions for databases running in Azure and GCP private networks
  
Have a specific database or integration in mind? Upvote existing issues or open a new request in our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/pulumi/esc/issues)!

## Conclusion

> Pulumi ESC's Automated Database Credential Rotation drastically simplifies a critical security task. By automating the rotation of PostgreSQL, MySQL (on AWS), and Snowflake credentials, ESC reduces operational overhead, minimizes the risk associated with static secrets, and helps you meet compliance requirements more easily.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/pulumi/docs/pull/14818/files#r2057846600
```suggestion
Pulumi ESC's Automated Database Credential Rotation drastically simplifies a critical security task. By automating the rotation of PostgreSQL and MySQL (on AWS), as well as Snowflake credentials, ESC reduces operational overhead, minimizes the risk associated with static secrets, and helps you meet compliance requirements more easily.
```

---
title: "Introducing Automated Database Credential Rotation for PostgreSQL, MySQL, and Snowflake in Pulumi ESC"
date: 2025-04-30 # Adjust T00:00:00-00:00 as needed for timezone/exact time
allow_long_title: true

> meta_desc: "Pulumi ESC now automates the rotation of database credentials for PostgreSQL, MySQL (on AWS), and Snowflake, enhancing security and reducing operational burden."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
meta_desc: "Pulumi ESC now automates the rotation of database credentials for PostgreSQL and MySQL (on AWS), and Snowflake, enhancing security and reducing operational burden."
```

tags:
- esc
- secrets
- features
- rotation
- database
- security
---

Securing access to critical data stores is paramount in today's cloud-native world. Yet, managing database credentials often involves static, long-lived passwords – a significant security blind spot. These static secrets, frequently embedded in application configurations or accessible to multiple team members, represent a prime target for attackers. Manually rotating these credentials is a cumbersome, error-prone task that’s often neglected, leaving databases vulnerable for extended periods. Building on our commitment to robust secrets management, we are excited to launch **Automated Database Credential Rotation** for **PostgreSQL, MySQL, and Snowflake** in [Pulumi ESC!](/product/esc)

<!--more-->

## The Persistent Challenge of Static Database Secrets

Relying on static database credentials introduces substantial risks, which automated rotation helps mitigate:

*   **Security Vulnerabilities & Exposure:** Static credentials, if compromised through leaks, phishing, or unauthorized access, provide long-term access to attackers. Automated rotation significantly shrinks this window of opportunity.

> *   **Operational & Compliance Burdens:** Manually rotating database credentials is complex, error-prone, and requires careful coordination to avoid downtime. It also makes demonstrating compliance with regulations like SOC 2, GDPR, or HIPAA (which often mandate rotation) difficult and hard to audit consistently.

Reviewer 2: Last sentence is hard to read, IMO 
```suggestion
*   **Operational & Compliance Burdens:** Manually rotating database credentials is complex, error-prone, and requires careful coordination to avoid downtime. These manual rotations are hard to audit and demonstrate compliance with regulations like SOC 2, GDPR, or HIPAA (which often mandate rotation).
```

> *   **Network Complexity:** Many databases reside within private networks (like AWS VPCs) for security. Rotating credentials for these databases typically requires bridging this network gap securely, often involving mechanisms like proxies, bastion hosts, or specific agents. This adds significant setup and maintenance overhead for manual or homegrown solutions.

Reviewer 2: The homegrown solutions can often work in the network, so I am not sure we are much better here with our model (you still have to deploy something).  The main thing is that you would have to write a rotator as say your own lambda (not hard), but then you would lack revision history, auditing, centralized secret management, etc.

> *   **Tooling and Ecosystem Compatibility:** Many standard database administration GUIs, Business Intelligence platforms, ETL tools, and custom scripts were built primarily for username/password authentication. While support for cloud provider-specific methods like AWS IAM database authentication is growing, it's not universal. Older versions, generic ODBC/JDBC connectors, or specific tools may lack native support or require complex configuration, making username/password the more straightforward or only viable connection method for these essential parts of the data ecosystem, reinforcing the need for automated password rotation.

Reviewer 2: We should add the Cloud Native use case that cannot you AWS IAM auth.

Author: Is this good?

**Tooling, Ecosystem, and Cloud-Native Connectivity:** While cloud provider IAM database authentication (like AWS IAM) is powerful, it's not universally adopted or always practical. Many essential tools (standard DB GUIs, BI platforms, ETL pipelines) and older applications were built primarily for username/password. Furthermore, modern cloud-native applications, especially those in multi-cloud/hybrid environments or running in contexts like Kubernetes clusters that aren't tightly integrated with the specific cloud provider's IAM system (e.g., an application in GKE needing to connect to AWS RDS, or even an EKS workload configured without IAM Roles for Service Accounts), often find direct IAM integration complex or impossible. For these widespread scenarios, traditional username/password remains the most straightforward or only viable connection method, reinforcing the critical need for *automated rotation* of these credentials.

Author: Updating in next commit

> Pulumi ESC addresses these challenges by automating the rotation process, including databases in private networks.

Reviewer 2: Should we be explict that we support AWS for now, and have link to premade Azure and GCP items for upvoting?
Perhaps Oracle and CloudFlare too.

*   **Automated Rotation Schedules:** Effortlessly define rotation frequencies (daily, weekly, monthly) that align with your security policies, eliminating manual toil and ensuring consistency.
*   **On-Demand Rotation:** Instantly rotate credentials in response to security events, personnel changes, or policy updates with a single click or command.
*   **Seamless ESC Environment Integration:** Manage rotated database credentials alongside all your other application configurations within ESC Environments, leveraging composition and environment inheritance.
*   **Two-Secret Strategy:** ESC maintains both the current and previous valid credentials simultaneously. This prevents application downtime during rotation, as instances can gracefully transition to the new credential.
*   **Auditing and Tracking:** Maintain a complete audit trail of credential rotations, including who initiated the rotation and when, simplifying compliance and governance.
*   **Admin and Creator Control:** Securely configure rotation using privileged database "managing user" credentials stored within ESC, keeping them separate from the rotated credentials consumed by applications.

> *   **Configure Webhooks for Automation:** Trigger notifications, CI/CD pipelines (e.g., Pulumi Deployments to update application stacks), or custom workflows upon successful rotation, keeping dependent systems synchronized.

Reviewer 2: We should remind folks of other ways to consume these secrets, like our K8s offerings and SDK.

Author: updating in next commit

{{% notes type="info" %}}
The following setup guide provides a detailed walkthrough for [**PostgreSQL**](/docs/esc/integrations/rotated-secrets/postgres/) hosted within an AWS private VPC, which requires a Lambda-based connector. Please refer to the [**MySQL**](/docs/esc/integrations/rotated-secrets/mysql/) or [**Snowflake**](/docs/esc/integrations/rotated-secrets/snowflake-user/) documentation page for instructions on these two databases.
{{% /notes %}}

> ## How to Set Up and Use PostgreSQL Rotation (AWS VPC Example)

Reviewer 2: Can we make a chooser so this can show a mysql example and snowflake example?

Author: mySQL we can. Snowflake doesn't follow the same steps.

> Setting up rotation for PostgreSQL databases running inside an AWS VPC involves [creating the required users](/docs/esc/environments/rotation/db-preparation/) within your database, deploying the rotator Lambda infrastructure via a Pulumi template, configuring ESC environments, and scheduling the rotation.

Author: updating in next commit

> Setting up rotation for PostgreSQL databases running inside an AWS VPC involves [creating the required users](/docs/esc/environments/rotation/db-preparation/) within your database, deploying the rotator Lambda infrastructure via a Pulumi template, configuring ESC environments, and scheduling the rotation.

Reviewer 2: Should we detail our approach here? We are defining "rotator Lambda infra" without first defining it.

1.  **Managing User:** A privileged user that ESC will use to perform the password rotations. This user needs permissions to change the passwords of the application users.
2.  **Application User 1 and Application User 2:** The two application users whose passwords ESC will manage. ESC rotates between these two users, ensuring two users are always active as applications gradually phase out the `previous` user credentials.

Connect to the database as a superuser and run the following SQL commands:

  *   Create the application users whose passwords you want ESC to rotate automatically:
      ```sql
      CREATE USER user1 WITH PASSWORD 'initial_password'; -- Replace with a secure initial password
      GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE your_database_name TO user1;
      -- Grant necessary privileges on tables/schemas for user1 (adjust as needed)
      GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO user1; -- Example grant

      CREATE USER user2 WITH PASSWORD 'initial_password'; -- Replace with a secure initial password
      GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE your_database_name TO user2;
      -- Grant necessary privileges on tables/schemas for user2 (adjust as needed)

>       GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO user2; -- Example grant

Author: updating in next commit

      ```

  *   Create the designated "managing user" account with privileges to modify passwords for the application users:
      ```sql
      CREATE USER managing_user WITH PASSWORD 'manager_password'; -- Replace with a strong password

      -- Grant privileges to ALTER the application users (required to change passwords).
      -- Granting the application roles to the managing user with ADMIN OPTION allows management.
      GRANT user1 TO managing_user WITH ADMIN OPTION;
      GRANT user2 TO managing_user WITH ADMIN OPTION;

      -- Ensure the managing user can connect to the database
      GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE your_database_name TO managing_user;
      ```

**Step 2: Bootstrap Rotation Infrastructure and Create ESC Environments**

To rotate credentials for PostgreSQL databases within AWS VPCs securely, you need to configure an [AWS Lambda function](/docs/esc/environments/rotation/aws-lambda/) within your VPC and create the corresponding ESC environments.

> If your PostgreSQL instance is running on AWS RDS, we recommend using our [Pulumi New Project Wizard Template](https://app.pulumi.com/new?template=https://github.com/pulumi/templates/esc-connector-lambda-typescript) to simplify the process of creating the Lambda function, associated AWS IAM Roles, Security Groups, and the basic ESC environment structure. You can start it from the [Pulumi console](https://app.pulumi.com/new?template=https://github.com/pulumi/templates/esc-connector-lambda-typescript) or by running the following command in your terminal:

Reviewer 2: Can we have a link to the templates themselves so folks can peruse them to see what it is doing?

Author: LInked to the template

> If your PostgreSQL instance is running on AWS RDS, we recommend using our [Pulumi New Project Wizard Template](https://app.pulumi.com/new?template=https://github.com/pulumi/templates/esc-connector-lambda-typescript) to simplify the process of creating the Lambda function, associated AWS IAM Roles, Security Groups, and the basic ESC environment structure. You can start it from the [Pulumi console](https://app.pulumi.com/new?template=https://github.com/pulumi/templates/esc-connector-lambda-typescript) or by running the following command in your terminal:

Author: Updating in latest.

*   Run `pulumi new esc-connector-lambda-typescript` in your terminal.
*   This command initializes a new Pulumi project designed to provision the necessary AWS resources and create the ESC environments.
*   Follow the prompts. You will first provide a **Pulumi project name** (e.g., `my-db-rotation-infra`). Then, you will be prompted for configuration values like:
    *   Your target AWS Region (`aws:region`)
    *   The RDS Database Identifier (`rdsDbIdentifier`)
    *   The specific **name for the ESC rotation environment** (e.g., `postgresrotation/Rotator`). This environment will contain the two application users' credentials and configuration for rotation.
    *   The specific **name for the ESC managing credentials environment** (e.g., `postgresrotation/ManagingCreds`).
*   Run `pulumi up` to deploy the AWS resources and create the ESC environments with the names you provided.

**Step 3: Configure ESC Environments and Test**

> The Pulumi template created two ESC environments with most configuration pre-filled. You need to update them with your specific PostgreSQL user credentials and database name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Pulumi template creates two ESC environments with most of the configuration pre-filled. You need to update them with your specific PostgreSQL user credentials and database name.
```

  # postgresrotation/Rotator
  values:
    dbRotator:
      fn::rotate::postgres:
        inputs:
          database:
            connector:
              awsLambda:
                login: ${environments.postgresrotation.ManagingCreds.awsLogin}
                lambdaArn: arn:aws:lambda:us-west-2:616138583583:function:PulumiEscSecretRotatorLambda-Function-d9932fe # Example Lambda ARN populated by template
            # Database connection details
            database: mydb # Replace with your DB name
            host: tf-20250428212643894700000001.cluster-chuqccm8uxqx.us-west-2.rds.amazonaws.com # Example Host populated by template
            port: 5432 # Example Port populated by template
            managingUser: ${environments.postgresrotation.ManagingCreds.managingUser}
          # List of application users whose passwords will be rotated
          rotateUsers:
            username1: user1 # Replace DB username if different from logical name
            username2: user2 # Replace DB username if different from logical name

        # state section is automatically managed by ESC after first rotation
        # Do not provide state unless migrating existing, known credentials.

>         state: # Example state *after* rotations have occurred

Author: I'll comment it out. 

There are more existing active databases than new database,s so we gotta share how to onboard existing creds.

      *   Perform a *second* rotation. Observe how the previous `current` user (`user1`/`username1`) and its password become the `previous` entry in the ESC value. The system now rotates the password for the *other* user (`user2`/`username2`), makes it the new `current`, and updates the database accordingly. Subsequent rotations cycle between `user1` and `user2`.
      *   Check the Environment Revision History in the Pulumi Cloud console to track the changes to the `current` and `previous` state fields after each rotation.

**Step 4: Schedule Automated Rotations**

*   Once you are satisfied that manual rotations are working correctly, navigate to the "Secret Rotation" tab for your Rotator environment (e.g., `postgresrotation/Rotator`) in the Pulumi Cloud console.
*   Define your desired automated rotation schedule (e.g., every 30 days). ESC will automatically trigger rotations according to this schedule, ensuring your credentials stay fresh without manual intervention.

## What’s Next?

This launch significantly enhances database security posture through automation, but we're just getting started. We are actively working on expanding our rotated secrets capabilities:

> *   **More Databases:** Support for MongoDB, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle, and others.

Reviewer 2: Links to tickets to upvote?

Author: Updating in the next commit

*   **Databases in Private Networks on Other Clouds:** Rotation solutions for databases hosted in private networks within Azure and GCP.

> Have a specific database or integration in mind? Upvote existing issues or open a new request in our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/pulumi/esc/issues)!

Reviewer 2: Let's not make them find the tickets.

Author: Updating in the next commit.

> 

Reviewer 2: @nyobe Are we ready to say we support direct db connection?

Reviewer 3: working on merging https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-service/pull/27715 now, so, yes

## Conclusion

> Pulumi ESC's Automated Database Credential Rotation drastically simplifies a critical security task. By automating the rotation of **PostgreSQL**, **MySQL** (on AWS), and **Snowflake** credentials, ESC reduces operational overhead, minimizes the risk associated with static secrets, and helps you meet compliance requirements more easily. Whether your databases are in private networks or publicly accessible, ESC provides a unified way to manage their lifecycle.

Reviewer 4: This might be a bit misleading if we don't launch direct rotators with this release
